README.md, before:

# emptydir

This tool looks for empty directories and deletes them.

```console
$ emptydir 
```

More specifically, it deletes directories which are completely empty, or which only contain files/folders which I don't think are worth keeping (e.g. `.DS_Store` or `__pycache__`).





## Why not use `find`?

Deleting empty directories is a common problem, and there's a suggestion on [Unix Stack Exchange question](https://unix.stackexchange.com/a/107556/431830):

> Combining GNU find options and predicates, this command should do the job:
>
> ```
> find . -type d -empty -delete
> ```

The reason this isn't suitable is because it only deletes directories which are *completely* empty.
But sometimes a directory can be non-empty, even if it appears empty.

For example, this directory on macOS:

<img src="totally_empty.png" alt="A Finder window for a folder 'totally_empty' which apparently contains no files.">

I consider this directory to be empty, but it will be skipped by `find . -type d -empty -delete` because of the hidden [`.DS_Store` file](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/.DS_Store).

This tool will delete directories which are empty or almost empty -- that is, when they only contain files or folders which I don't think are worth keeping, like `.DS_Store` or `__pycache__`.





## Installation

You can download compiled binaries from the [GitHub releases](https://github.com/alexwlchan/emptydir/releases).

Alternatively, you can install from source.
You need Rust installed; I recommend using [Rustup].
Then clone this repository and compile the code:

```console
$ git clone "https://github.com/alexwlchan/emptydir.git"
$ cd emptydir
$ cargo install --path .
```

[Rustup]: https://rustup.rs/





## Usage

Pass the path of the top-level directory you want to clean as a command-line argument, for example:

```console
$ emptydir ~/Desktop
```

It will print the path to every empty directory that it deletes:

```console
$ mkdir -p ~/Desktop/foo/bar/baz
$ emptydir ~/Desktop/
/Users/alexwlchan/Desktop/foo/bar/baz
/Users/alexwlchan/Desktop/foo/bar
/Users/alexwlchan/Desktop/foo
3 directories deleted
```

If you pass no arguments, it will look for empty directories in the current directory:

```console
$ emptydir
```





## Which files/folders are safe to delete?

Currently the list of files/folders which I consider safe to delete is hard-coded in `can_be_deleted.rs`:

*   `.DS_Store` stores some folder attributes used for showing the folder in the Finder, which I don't need to keep
*   `__pycache__` is the bytecode cache in Python projects, which is pointless if the original Python files have been removed
*   `.venv` is the name I use for virtual environments, which I can asily regenerate if necessary

If you want to change that list, you need to modify the source code and compile a new version -- it's not a configurable setting.

Note that these files will only be deleted if they are the only items in a folder.
If, for example, a folder contains both `.DS_Store` and some text files, then nothing will be deleted.





## License

MIT.

Commit message:

Link to the accompanying article

README.md, after:

# emptydir

This tool looks for empty directories and deletes them.

```console
$ emptydir 
```

More specifically, it deletes directories which are completely empty, or which only contain files/folders which I don't think are worth keeping (e.g. `.DS_Store` or `__pycache__`).





## Why not use `find`?

Deleting empty directories is a common problem, and there's a suggestion on [Unix Stack Exchange question](https://unix.stackexchange.com/a/107556/431830):

> Combining GNU find options and predicates, this command should do the job:
>
> ```
> find . -type d -empty -delete
> ```

The reason this isn't suitable is because it only deletes directories which are *completely* empty.
But sometimes a directory can be non-empty, even if it appears empty.

For example, this directory on macOS:

<img src="totally_empty.png" alt="A Finder window for a folder 'totally_empty' which apparently contains no files.">

I consider this directory to be empty, but it will be skipped by `find . -type d -empty -delete` because of the hidden [`.DS_Store` file](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/.DS_Store).

This tool will delete directories which are empty or almost empty -- that is, when they only contain files or folders which I don't think are worth keeping, like `.DS_Store` or `__pycache__`.





## Installation

You can download compiled binaries from the [GitHub releases](https://github.com/alexwlchan/emptydir/releases).

Alternatively, you can install from source.
You need Rust installed; I recommend using [Rustup].
Then clone this repository and compile the code:

```console
$ git clone "https://github.com/alexwlchan/emptydir.git"
$ cd emptydir
$ cargo install --path .
```

[Rustup]: https://rustup.rs/





## Usage

Pass the path of the top-level directory you want to clean as a command-line argument, for example:

```console
$ emptydir ~/Desktop
```

It will print the path to every empty directory that it deletes:

```console
$ mkdir -p ~/Desktop/foo/bar/baz
$ emptydir ~/Desktop/
/Users/alexwlchan/Desktop/foo/bar/baz
/Users/alexwlchan/Desktop/foo/bar
/Users/alexwlchan/Desktop/foo
3 directories deleted
```

If you pass no arguments, it will look for empty directories in the current directory:

```console
$ emptydir
```





## Which files/folders are safe to delete?

Currently the list of files/folders which I consider safe to delete is hard-coded in `can_be_deleted.rs`:

*   `.DS_Store` stores some folder attributes used for showing the folder in the Finder, which I don't need to keep
*   `__pycache__` is the bytecode cache in Python projects, which is pointless if the original Python files have been removed
*   `.venv` is the name I use for virtual environments, which I can asily regenerate if necessary

If you want to change that list, you need to modify the source code and compile a new version -- it's not a configurable setting.

Note that these files will only be deleted if they are the only items in a folder.
If, for example, a folder contains both `.DS_Store` and some text files, then nothing will be deleted.



## How it works

For a detailed explanation of how this tool works, you can read [my accompanying article](https://alexwlchan.net/2024/emptydir/).



## License

MIT.
